#+TITLE: How I Built a Learning Machine
#+DATE: <2021-05-23 Sun>
#+TAGS[]: 他山之石

source: [[https://dev.to/jbranchaud/how-i-built-a-learning-machine-45k9]]

Back in late 2014, after being laid off from a startup that was
struggling to prove out a business model, I found myself hunting for my
next software development role. Along with cleaning up my resume and
sending out some applications, I started doing some extracurricular
stuff like blogging and contributing to OSS (including
[[https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/19685][Rust]]). I was feeling
both bored and inadequate, so I was trying to find a way to stick out.
These things took a lot of energy and I was having trouble keeping them
up.

In early 2015, I auditioned for a position at Hashrocket. I came out of
the audition with a ton of notes -- small things I had picked up while
[[https://dev.to/jbranchaud/give-pair-programming-another-chance-3nbk][pairing]]
with different members of the team. As I anxiously awaited to hear back,
I felt this (sorta irrational) desire to continue to prove myself and I
didn't want to lose track of what I had learned. So, I started writing
up short, to-the-point microblogs about the different things I had
learned. I started collecting these in a GitHub repository and indexed
all of it with a README.

This repo was aptly named [[https://github.com/jbranchaud/til][TIL
(Today I Learned)]]. I say aptly because I added to it, nearly daily,
the small things I picked up from others and from my own googling,
reading, and experimenting. By the way, I got the job. Hashrocket's
incredible pairing culture played a huge role in my constant and
continued learning.

Fast forward a little bit and this small project aimed at impressing
potential employers and capturing some bits of learning has flourished.
I've filled it with over 900 posts covering at least 28 topics (check
out the [[https://github.com/jbranchaud/til#vim][Vim section]], there
are some wildly niche posts in there). It evolved from an obscure
scratchpad to a 6K+ star repository that I reference weekly -- "How do I
do X? ... Wait, I think I wrote a TIL about that once."

So, why did TIL work for me?

*Writing daily TIL posts became a habit that I could stick with.*

Unlike blog posts that often felt daunting to start or got left
unfinished, I could carve 10 to 15 minutes out of my work day to
solidify and document something I had picked up. There were a few
factors that were key to developing this as a habit:

1. *It was tightly constrained.* I limited posts to 200 words or less.
   They needed to be very focused to fit within that word limit.
2. *It took a small amount of time.* It always took me 10 to 15 minutes
   which always felt manageable, even on a busy day.
3. *I did it on the clock.* Part of my job as software developer and
   consultant is to learn. There is simply too much to know, so learning
   has to happen on the job. By making this part of my work routine, it
   was easy to do everyday.

*Writing daily TIL posts accelerated my learning and overall trajectory
as a developer.*

I didn't know it at the time, but I was /taking smart notes/. I kept a
notebook and pen in hand while pairing and coding. Anything new,
anything that piqued my interest or made me scratch my head, I jotted
down a note about it. This is the first phase of note-taking that Sönke
Ahrens lays out in
[[https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/1542866502/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=1542866502&linkCode=as2&tag=jbranchaud-20&linkId=5ccb332e5a1674d2f7e620f328f9b258][/How
To Take Smart Notes/]].

I would then pick the items from my notes that seemed important and
expand on them in my own words--using my own code snippets and linking
to reference material--as TILs. This second phase is what Ahrens
describes as
[[https://dev.to/jbranchaud/deliberate-note-taking-llh][deliberate
note-taking]]. This is where I solidified my learning while also
creating a "toolbox for thinking."

It started off small. I didn't have some grand plan for writing hundreds
of TILs or turbo charging my career. I was just publishing what I was
learning as I was learning it, which [[https://twitter.com/swyx][swyx]]
has since coined as
[[https://www.swyx.io/writing/learn-in-public/][/Learning In Public/]].

I realize now that I was inadvertently putting both deliberate
note-taking and the slow, steady work of
[[https://stackingthebricks.com/failure-the-hourly-mindset/][/stacking
the bricks/]] toward something bigger into practice. I've put a ton of
investment into this
[[https://www.keepproductive.com/blog/how-to-build-a-second-brain][/second
brain/]] of mine. It is paying dividends already -- it lends me a lot of
credibility essentially serving as a reference for any job application,
it has made me a much more capable developer and consultant, and I get
to refer to it often as an extension of my thinking.

I'm now reflecting on what is next for it. I'd like to multi-leverage
that content as a way of
[[https://kentcdodds.com/blog/how-i-am-so-productive][increasing the
impact of the value I've already created]]. This could look like a lot
of things including creating gifs, recording screencasts, expanding into
longer-form blog posts, linking into
[[https://tomcritchlow.com/2019/07/17/blogchains/][blogchains]],
cultivating as [[https://dev.to/jbranchaud/the-digital-garden-l10][a
digital garden]], etc.

--------------

References:

- [[https://github.com/jbranchaud/til][TIL Repository]], Josh Branchaud
- [[https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/1542866502/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=1542866502&linkCode=as2&tag=jbranchaud-20&linkId=5ccb332e5a1674d2f7e620f328f9b258][How
  To Take Smart Notes]], Sönke Ahrens
- [[https://stackingthebricks.com/failure-the-hourly-mindset/][Investment
  Mindset]], Amy Hoy

Notes:

Though there is a lot to get wrong with pairing, and I won't pretend
that it is easy to do effectively, when you get it right, I don't think
there is a better way to build software, not to speak of the tight
feedback loop that both developers provide for one another. This pairing
dynamic can sometimes even develop into
[[https://dev.to/jbranchaud/into-the-flywheel-29h0][a flywheel]].

My own TIL repository eventually became a source of inspiration for an
internal TIL project at Hashrocket. [[https://twitter.com/jwworth][Jake
Worth]] created a Rails-based platform for the entire company to write,
publish, and share the small things they were writing. It was eventually
re-written using Elixir and Phoenix. Checkout what they are writing at
[[https://til.hashrocket.com/][til.hashrocket.com]].

What Sönke Ahrens calls a "toolbox for thinking," could also be called
by this singular, odd word I recently learned --
[[https://twitter.com/jessitron/status/1241758480639426560?s=20][organon]].
That is, "an instrument of thought, especially a means of reasoning or a
system of logic."
