#+TITLE: 去爱吧
#+DATE: <2021-04-15 Thu>
#+TAGS[]: 诗作

《去爱吧》------艾佛列德·德索萨

Love like you've never been hurt.

Dance like nobody's watching.

Sing like nobody's listening.

work like you don't need the money .

Live like it's heaven on earth.

--------Alfred D'Souza

去爱吧，就像不曾受过伤一样

跳舞吧，像没有人会欣赏一样

唱歌吧，像没有人会聆听一样

干活吧，像是不需要金钱一样

生活吧，就像今天是末日一样

to love, like never been hurt

to dance,like no one appreciate

to sing, like no one listen to

to work, like no need of money

to life, like today is the end.

------Alfred D'Souza

出处及原文：

We always convince ourselves that life will be better after we get
married, have a baby, than another. Then we are frustrated that the kids
are not old enough and well be more content when they are. After that
were frustrated that we have teenagers to deal with. We will certainly
be happy when they are out of that stage. We always tell ourselves that
our life will be complete when our spouse gets his or her act together.
When we get a nice a car, and are able to go on a nice vocation when we
retire. The truth is, there's no better time than right now. if not now,
when? Our life will always be filled with challenges. It's best to admit
this to ourselves and decide to be happy anyway.

One of my favorite quotes comes from Alfred Souza. He said.”for a long
time it had seemed to me that life was about to begin-real life. But
there was always some obstacle in the way, something to be gotten
through firest, some unfinished business, time still to be served, a
debt to be paid. Then life would begin. At last it dawned on me that
these obstacles were my life.” This perspective has helped me to see
that there is no way to happiness.

Happiness is the way. So treasure every moment that you have. And
remember that time waits for no one. So stop waiting until you finish
school, until you go back to school; until you get married, until you
get divorced; until you have kids; until you retire; until you get a new
car or home; until spring; until you are born again to decide that there
is no better time than right now to be happy....

Happiness is a journey, not a destination. So, work like you don't need
money, love like you've never been hurt, And dance like no one's
watching.

···中文译文：

我们总是相信，等我们结了婚，生了孩子，生活会更美好。等有了孩子，我们又因为他们不够大而烦恼，想等他们大些时，我们就会开心了。可等他们进入青少年时期，我们还是同样的苦恼，于是又相信等他们过了这一阶段，幸福就会到来。
我们总是告诉自己，等夫妻间任一方肯于合作，等我们拥有更好的车，等我们能去度一次美妙的假期，等我们退休后，我们的生活一定会完美的。而事实的真相是，没有任何时刻比现在更宝贵。倘若不是现在，又会是何时？我们的生活每时每刻都会有挑战。最好是让自己接受这一事实，无论如何使自己保持快乐的心境。
我很欣赏艾尔弗雷德·苏泽的一段名言。他说："长期以来，我都觉得生活------真正的生活似乎即将开始。可是总会遇到某种障碍，如得先完成一些事情。没做完的工作，要奉献的时间，该付的债，等等。之后生活才会开始。最后我醒悟过来了，这些障碍本身就是我的生活。"这一观点让我意识到没有什么通往幸福的道路。幸福本身就是路。所以，珍惜你拥有的每一刻，且记住时不我待，不要再作所谓的等待------等你上完学，等你再回到学校；等你结婚或离婚；等你有了孩子或孩子长大离开家；等你开始工作或等你退休；等你有了新车或新房；等春天来临；等你有幸再来世上走一遭才明白此时此刻最应快乐......

幸福是一个旅程，不是终点站。所以，投入地工作吧，就像你根本不需要钱；尽情去爱吧，就像你从未被伤害过；纵情地起舞吧，就像根本无人观望。
